❡&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;THE FUTURE OF LANGUAGE
<pb/>
This “writing through” of Vilém Flusser’s ‘The Future of Writing,’ reconfiguring it so as to become John Cayley’s ‘The Future of Language,’ will not consider problems concerning any possible future for the teaching or philosophizing of any particular art of language in the face of the growing importance of non- or anti-linguistic messages in our surroundings, although those problems have already become significant in the so-called developed countries.
<ub>
Instead, it proposes to consider a tendency that underlies those problems: namely, the tendency to deny or distrust the fundamental linearity of language – including as it is perceived during processes of reading – and toward multi-dimensional codes such as photographs, films, TV, screen-based graphic design in the service of social and socialized media, and, generally, a conception of art and aesthetics that is dominated by visuality, by so-called “fine” as “visual” or “plastic” art even as and when this world of art embraces the conceptualism or “post-medium condition” which could, in principle if not in practice, be extended to the arts of language.
This distrust and denial may be observed everywhere if one glances even superficially at the codified world that surrounds us.
</ub>
<ub>
Literature is $50bn behind art.
The MoMAs in every province and metropolis are stuffed to their gills with hipsters, gleeful families, and young “artists” while fewer and fewer deserted book malls provide desultory subterranean spaces for retiree reading groups.
</ub>
The “future” of language, or rather, of those gestures which align symbols to produce our shared, collective, readable utterances, must be seen against the background of a long-standing tendency to distrust their alignment.
<sb/>

The translation from surface into line implies a radical change of dimensionality with respect to the grasp of meaning.
The eye that deciphers an image scans the surface, and it thus establishes reversible and arbitrary spatial relations between the elements of the image.
It may go back and forth while deciphering the image.
This spatiality of relations that prevails within the image characterizes the world for those who use images for the understanding of the world, who “imagine” it.
For them, all the things in the world are related to each other in such a reversible, spatial equivalence, and the world is structured by “eternal return.”
It is just as true to say that night follows day as that day follows night, that sowing follows reaping as that reaping follows sowing, that life follows death as that death follows life.
The crowing of the cock calls the sun to rise just as much as the rising sun calls the cock to crow.
In such a world, circular time orders all things, “assigns them their just place,” and if a thing is displaced it will be readjusted by time itself.
Because to live is to displace things, life in such a world is a series of “unjust” acts that will be revenged in time.
This demands that we propitiate the order of the world, the “gods” of which it is full.
In sum: the “imagined” world may be a world of myth, of magic, an ahistorical world.
