❡&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;THE FUTURE OF WRITING
<pb/>
This essay will not consider the problems concerning the future of teaching the art of writing in the face of the growing importance of nonliterate messages in our surroundings, although those problems will become ever more important both in the so-called developed countries and in societies where illiteracy is still widespread.
<ub>
Instead, it proposes to consider a tendency that underlies those problems: namely, the tendency away from linear codes such as writing and toward two-dimensional codes such as photographs, films, and TV, a tendency that may be observed if one glances even superficially at the codified world that surrounds us.
</ub>
<ub>
</ub>
The future of writing, of that gesture which aligns symbols to produce texts, must be seen against the background of that tendency.
<sb/>

he translation from surface into line implies a radical change of meaning.
The eye that deciphers an image scans the surface, and it thus establishes reversible relations between the elements of the image.
It may go back and forth while deciphering the image.
This reversibility of relations that prevails within the image characterizes the world for those who use images for the understanding of the world, who “imagine” it.
For them, all the things in the world are related to each other in such a reversible way, and their world is structured by “eternal return.”
It is just as true to say that night follows day as that day follows night, that sowing follows reaping as that reaping follows sowing, that life follows death as that death follows life.
The crowing of the cock calls the sun to rise just as much as the rising sun calls the cock to crow.
In such a world, circular time orders all things, “assigns them their just place,” and if a thing is displaced it will be readjusted by time itself.
Because to live is to displace things, life in such a world is a series of “unjust” acts that will be revenged in time.
This demands that man propitiate the order of the world, the “gods” of which it is full.
In sum: the “imagined” world is the world of myth, of magic, the prehistorical world.
