But language is a human faculty not a tool for use.
Language will always have articulated our consciousness in the face of imagination with more or less persistence.
There is in images, as in all mediations, a curious inherent dialectic.
We see the world as images both literally and figuratively.
Visuality is, in a sense, opaque, and covers reality, substituting the imaginary for the real.
Images come to constitute an imaginary world that no longer mediates between us and our world, but, on the contrary, constrains and deludes us.
Imagination does not overcome alienation; it becomes hallucination, or double alienation.
Images do not reveal; we are what they show us.
We “adore” the images that we can see, even those images that we can see and the world does not.
It is against this idolatry of images, as a therapy against this double alienation, that language cares for us.
Some of those who first spoke to us in our traditions – the prophets, for instance – learned this by committing themselves against idols and idol making.
And so did Plato when he announced his hatred of what we now call the “plastic arts.”
Language, human inscription, in time and the world, of what we are – language allows us to save the images and care for the imagination.
§7<pb/>
Now, if we consider history to be the period during which conventional writing performs a rendering explicit of what is implicit in myths of the imaginary, this continues to be, for us, a problematic and painful, not to say tragic, process.
For the most part, historical consciousness is the privilege of a small elite, while the vast majority continues to lead an ahistoric, magico-mythical existence.
The texts of authority have always been scarce and expensive.
The deep reading of books – the knowledge of how and what to read – is restricted to a privileged class of scribes and literati.
The invention of printing did, historically, crack open our clerical classes and made the historical regime accessible to a rising bourgeoisie, but it was only during the industrial revolution and through the public primary school system that knowing the language of “literacy” and historical consciousness can be said to have become common in the industrialized countries.
But almost immediately a new kind of image, the photograph, was invented, which began to threaten the supremacy of conventional writing, and in the twentieth century it looked as if the days of historical, rational, conceptual thinking were numbered, and as if we were approaching a new type of magico-mythical age, a posthistorical image culture.
§8<pb/>
Rational, conceptual thinking (and acting) has an intimate relationship with language as our shared realm for symbolic practice, yet rationality, which is also in our world, may seem to us an exceptional form of existence, allied with the apparent progress of written history and perhaps no more than a brief interlude within our simultaneously ageless “eternal return” of the imaginary, of myth and magic.
But language, just like imaginary, may be torn by an internal dialectic, and this dialectic may take a more pernicious aspect in language than it does even in image making.
Language may mean, and may explain images, and texts may become opaque, unreadable, unimaginable, and so constitute barriers between ourselves and the world.
Today, moreover, formal language literally constitutes images, concealed beneath their perceptible surfaces.
The vectors of meaning of such texts turn around and point at their authors, instead of pointing at our shared world, real or imaginary.
This perversion of language may be observed very early in the course of history, but during the nineteenth century it becomes obvious: scientific texts (which are the most characteristic form of persistent writing, and therefore the “aim of history”) tend to become explicitly unimaginable (one reads them erroneously if one tries to imagine their meaning), and scientific research “discovers” the rules that order its own texts (mainly logic and mathematics) “behind” the phenomena it is explaining.
Such unimaginable explanations that mirror the structure of literate thought are existentially devoid of meaning, and in such a situation texts begin to constitute a kind of paranoid library wall that triply alienates us from our world.
It is against the threatening lunacy of formal rationalism, of a meaningless existence amid speculative, opaque explanations, that the rise of the new image culture must be seen.
For the reason that the new image culture is, precisely, encoded and computed as, precisely, this threatening lunacy.
§9<pb/>
However, it would be an error to suppose that life amid posters, traffic signs, TV programs, illustrated magazines, movie pictures, the internet, and feedback surveillance will be like life before we inscribed language as persistent visuality, that aliteracy will be restored.
Even those images generated by photo-optical apparatuses are unlike the images that have been given to us by the world in that they are themselves products of texts, and in that they feed on texts.
They are products of historical process.
Scientistic technics allowed the construction of photo-optical image makers As for the images of digitalized cultural, they are composed from formal text as such, from programs and software.
The essential difference between a TV program and a tapestry is not (as one might believe) that the one moves and talks while the other stands still and is mute, but that the TV program is the result of scientific theories (texts) and that it needs texts (for instance, telegrams) for it to function.
These types of images were called, by Vilém Flusser, “techno- (or technical) images,” and the convention that they are based on Flusser designated as “techno-imagination,” so as to distinguish a world that was still in the future when he performed this act of naming.
No doubt techno-images are a sort of image, and they therefore mean, like every image, our world of myth and of magic, our imaginary.
But life in the future at which we have arrived bears a different relation to the mythical, magic within which we had evolved to live long before textually defined apparatuses or digitalization.
This difference may be addressed as follows: images as such are given by and are intended to mean the world; posthistoric images imply texts and are now also composed from integrated texts.
Imagination as such tries to grasp the world and posthistoric imagination tries to be text illustration or to illustrate the world as itself text.
Therefore, myths as such imagine “real” situations and posthistoric myths will mean textual prescriptions.
Magic as such is meant to propitiate the world, whereas posthistoric magic will be designed to manipulate people, to manipulate us, ourselves.
§10<pb/>
We can imagine a future for practices of writing but we must keep in mind the circumstance that language is an evolved faculty and will not change significantly until evolution enables it to do so – beyond the scope of our imagination – because imagination, myth and magic, our imaginary and symbolic existences are similarly evolved.
All of what we call history can only ever be something that we imagine and express as language within the scope of our evolved faculties.
We ourselves have not changed; our shared practices are reconfigured within this scope with respect to technics that are, indeed, associated with the symbolic, if not also the real.
>>><p/>
The trend toward a culture of techno-images underwent a profound reconfiguration that was prefigured but not fully appreciated by Flusser.
As he anticipated, culture, historically, became a gigantic transcoder although not “from text into image.”
Rather, images are all now both transcoded and composed, inscribed as generative text in the sense of formal processes of computation, essentially and (to-date) necessarily linear.
Culture is a sort of black box that has texts for input and images encoded and composed from text for output.
In so far are these processes are now also multi-layered, so-called neural networks of probabilistic circuits, the culture box is truly black in that no telling of its text could conjure an image that we would care to see.
All texts now flow into that box (news about events, theoretical comments about them, scientific papers, poetry, philosophical speculations), and they come out again as images (films, TV programs, photographic pictures, [typo]graphic design in the service of social and socialized media): which is to say that history flow into the box, and comes out of it under the form of myth and magic.
From the point of view of the texts that flow into the box – i.e. from the point of view of the contemporary regime of computation, from the point of view of Big Software and Big Data – this is the utopian situation that was misperceived in the late 1980s and 1990s: the box is the “fullness of time,” because it devours linear time, it consumes and renders time as persuasive images that consume our attention.
From the point of view of the images that come out of the box, this will be a situation in which history becomes a mere pretext for the programs that have produced them.
In sum, the future for practices of writing as such is to write and code pretexts for programs while believing that one is writing for utopia.
§11<pb/>
It is not important for the understanding of this present or any future for practices of writing to try to whiten the black box, to try to understand how it works.
The attempt to “demythify” the computational transcoding apparatus is, of course, one of the most important challenges of “forecasting and planning now and for the future.”
But it is not indispensable where practices of writing are the problem.
One may disregard the wheels and screws that constitute the apparatus (the countless “media,” “programmers,” and other human and quasi-human operators who compose it), and concentrate upon the images as they come out of the box left black, if one wants to see what it is to be a “writer” now and in the future.
In other words, it is not necessary to analyze the whole hopelessly complex system that stands behind a TV program or social media platform if one wants to understand the present crisis of rational thinking and acting.
It is sufficient to analyze and critique the programs.
§12<pb/>
As I say this, with Flusser, we presuppose a present crisis.
For Flusser it is a crisis of history, of teleology even.
For me it is a crisis within the pace and extension of evolution where history and imagination, like language, are merely faculties or potentialities of a particular evolved entity the end of which is certain while evolution as such may well be as long and extensive as the universe of which we are an infinitesimal part.
There is no crisis of any moment.
>>><p/>
Nonetheless, the circumstances of any and all relationships between language and imagination remain critical.
History may be said to be the attempt to submit imagination to the criticism of reason.
Practices of language are meant to be critiques of images, and language, as a coded inscription, is an analysis of surfaces into lines.
Therefore, during history, imagination was the source of reason: the stronger the imagination, the greater the challenge of critical reason, and rich images permit more powerful linear explanations.
There is something iconoclastic about historical reason: the better the icons against which it advances, the stronger is reason.
But now practices of language are becoming subservient to image making, reason to imagination: one can observe this while analyzing any TV program or social media platform.
The better the reasoning, the richer becomes imagination.
Planning has become a highly rational process in the service of highly irrational aims.
The critical thing is therefore not one of oblivion for the arts of language, of reason’s decadence.
It is one of reason’s prostitution, of a “betrayal of the intellectuals,” especially the humanists One may sum this up as follows: when it became obvious that reason might be a kind of paranoia, the intellectuals stopped being iconoclastic and became idolatrous, and present TV programs and social media platforms are among the results of that conversion.
§13<pb/>
Social media platforms are not, of course, the most impressive examples of what happens when reason betrays itself and serves imagination.
Fake News, proto-fascist Trumpism, and certain aspects of the surveillance-driven attention economy are better illustrations.
It may be held that proto-fascist Trumpism is one of the cruder advances in the direction of a future culture of images, or that the future techno-image culture will be proto-fascist Trumpism perfected.
This is why the battle cry “L’imagination au pouvoir!” that shook so many intellectuals out of their dogmatic slumber in May ’68 has such a dubious ring to it.
No doubt, rebellion against paranoid reason, against meaningless explanations, is necessary and healthy.
But intellectuals are language makers.
They are committed to clear and distinct concepts, to reason.
They are the historical consciousness of their society.
If they adhere to the claim that imagination should take over, the dignity of man as a free actor, which means “history,” will be over.
§14<pb/>
It may be asked, however, what language artists can do in the immediate future but serve imagination.
If all the texts are devoured by the gigantic transcoder to become images, how can this trend be resisted?
Is it not so that if a text deliberately resists the trend, it becomes even better fodder for the universal computational transcoding apparatus?
Actions committed to history and against the apparatus, like monks burning themselves to death or students being killed in riots, are even better pretexts for TV programs and social media than are deliberate scripts made by TV programmers or bloggers.
The universal trend in the developed world – in which practices of language and of digitalized writing in particular are becoming subservient to image making, planning to irrationality, and reason to magic – is now literally automatic: computed, automated and autonomous of both institutional and individual decisions.
§15<pb/>
This would be a perniciously wrong interpretation of the crisis of language.
Language makes and works together with images, and the task of reason, or symbolic thought as language, is to criticize imagination.
This is doubly true in the present crisis.
Language must now make and work with both the techno-images of Flusser’s apparatuses and with the symbolic computational images of which digitalized culture is composed, and the task of reason, or language as symbolic thought, is to criticize techno- and computational-imagination.
Of course, this implies a sort of qualitative jump onto a new level of meaning on the part of reason.
Practices of writing once explained images of the world.
If we are to care for a culture that has been wounded and misdirected by computation, the arts of language will have to explain those illustrations that its programs have produced.
To practice writing as an inscriptional language meant, and may still mean, to render opaque images transparent for the world.
Now, it must mean to render opaque techno- and computational images transparent for the texts they are hiding.
In other words, reason, in the past, meant analysis of myths, and in the future it will mean de-ideologization.
Reason will still be iconoclastic, but on a new level and with a new politics.
§16<pb/>
But language is an evolved faculty and cannot be more for us than it is, despite our deep reading of cybernetics and software studies, of structural and poststructural analyses.
It is perfectly possible that the general trend toward techno- and computational images is already irresistible, and that practices of language (as opposed to language-as-such) have already degenerated into the planning of programs – that to make language is already not to make “grams” but “programs” and that all texts are mere pretexts.
There is no future of language.
An evolved faculty cannot have a future for an entity that has evolved to have this faculty.
It is simply a fact that the making of language will either critique and exceed the techno- and computational imagination (which means unmasking the ideologies hiding behind a technical progress that has become autonomous of human decisions) or it will serve the production of pretexts for techno- and computational images, allowing a constitutive faculty to operate perversely as the instrument of reductive, scientistic “progress.”
As language speaks the future is unimaginable by definition.
If language is to serve computation, history in any shared understanding of that term has already come to an end, and we may easily imagine what will follow: the eternal return of digitalized life in a computational configuration that progresses by its own inertia.
§17
